UofToronto{ECE 345{Fall, 2022 1 Course Information
Course Information
ECE 345 Algorithms and Data Structures
University of Toronto
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Fall Semester, 2022
Course Description
Design and analysis of algorithms and data structures that are essential to engineers in every aspect of the computer
hardware and software industry. Topics include recurrences, asymptotics, summations, sorting, search trees and
balanced search trees, amortized analysis, hash functions, dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, basic graph
algorithms, minimum spanning trees, shortest paths, introduction to NP completeness and new trends in algorithms
and data structures.
Learning Objectives
Upon successful completion of this course, you should be able to explain the systematic methods of eciently
organizing and accessing data in data structures and algorithms, identify the properties and structural patterns in
data structures,apply abstract data types to the design of data structures, analyze algorithms using a mathematical
notation, perform comparative analysis of the typical data structures and algorithms, design and analyze recursive
algorithms, write code in pseudocode and high-level programming languages for the implementation of various data
structures and algorithms.
Sta
Section 1: Dr. Sidi Mohamed Beillahi, BA3242 ( sm.beillahi@utoronto.ca ). Oce hours: Wed 3:30-4:30pm
(BA3242 or via Zoom), or by appointment.
Section 2: Dr. Malik Khan ( mmurtaza.khan@utoronto.ca ). Oce hours: Mon 9-10am via Zoom, or by appointment.
Section 3: Dr. Zissis Poulos ( zpoulos@eecg.toronto.edu ). Oce hours: Fri 4:30-5:30pm via Zoom, or by appoint-
ment.
The head TA for this course is Panagiotis Michalopoulos ( p.michalopoulos@mail.utoronto.ca ).
The tutorial TAs for this course are Eric Keilty ( eric.keilty@mail.utoronto.ca ), Srisht Fateh Singh
(srishtfateh.singh@mail.utoronto.ca ), and Xun Deng ( xun.deng@mail.utoronto.ca ).
ECF Course Email: ece.algorithms+345@gmail.com (Course email to be used for general inquiries like questions
on material and remarking. This email address goes to TAs only and not to the instructors)
Course Piazza link: https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/fall2022/ece345 (Piazza page to be used for questions on the
homeworks. Announcements will be made on Quercus. )
Zoom link for oce hours: https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/89949927349
Lecture Schedule
LEC0101 (Dr. Beillahi): Mon (5pm-6pm, BA1130), Wed (5pm-6pm, BA1130), and Thu (5pm-6pm, BA1130).
LEC0102 (Dr. Khan): Mon (10am-11am, GB220), Wed (10am-11am, GB220), and Thu (10am-11am, GB220).
LEC0103 (Dr. Poulos): Mon (3pm-4pm, MP103), Wed (3pm-4pm, MP103), and Fri (3pm-4pm, MP103).
Each student is registered in one of the ve tutorial sections.
TUT0101 (Panagiotis): Mon (3pm-5pm, SF3202).
TUT0102 (Panagiotis): Fri (1pm-3pm, SF3202).
TUT0103 (Eric): Fri (10am-12am, BA1230).
TUT0104 (Xun): Fri (10am-12pm, BA1200).UofToronto{ECE 345{Fall, 2022 2 Course Information
TUT0105 (Srisht): Fri (1pm-3pm, GB220).
In tutorials, questions will be answered about the lecture material, address homework material and solve sample
pre-announced problems from the textbook. If you would like your TA to go over specic problems, please let them
know in advance via the ECF course email so they can prepare (please include the course code and tutorial section
in the subject).
Important Dates
Due
Homework 1 Friday, September 30th, 5pm
Homework 2 Friday, October 14th, 5pm
Homework 3 Friday, October 28th, 5pm
Homework 4 Friday, November 25th, 5pm
Homework 5 Thursday, December 8th, 5pm
Midterm To Be Announced...
Textbook and Class Contents
The required textbook for this course is T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, R. Rivest, C. Stein (CLRS), \ Introduction to
Algorithms ," McGraw Hill 2009 (3rd edition). CLRS is a well-written comprehensive textbook used by most major
universities. No other text is required and no lecture notes will be distributed.
In this class we will cover the following material:
•Background: asymptotics, recurrences, combinatorics, randomization, graphs and trees (Chapters 1 : : :5, Appen-
dices A, B and C)
•Sorting: quicksort and analysis, heapsort and analysis, other sorting methods, lower bounds in sorting and
selection in linear time (Chapters 6 : : :9)
•Binary Search trees, Red-Black trees, Amortized Analysis, Splay trees, Hashing (Chapters 10 : : :13, 17)
•Dynamic Programming and Greedy Algorithms (Chapters 15 and 16)
•Basic graph algorithms (breadth-rst search, depth-rst search) (Chapter 22)
•Minimum Spanning Trees and Single Source Shortest Paths (Chapters 23 and 24)
•An Introduction to Maximum Flow (Chapter 26)
•Introduction to theory of computation and NP-Completeness (Chapter 34)
•Introduction to Blockchain Technologies (Handout)
Course Webpage
All ocial announcements will be posted on Quercus ( q.utoronto.ca ).It is your own responsibility to check it at
regular intervals, i.e. once per day . It is strongly recommend to select \Notify immediately" for course announcements
in your account notication settings. This will forward all announcements to your university email. Questions on
the material ( i.e.,lectures, exams, tutorials, etc) should be asked during tutorial sessions, on Piazza, or sent to the
ECF course email: ece.algorithms+345@gmail.com .
On Quercus you will nd weekly reading assignments from CLRS and supplementary readings, homework assign-
ments, sample problem solutions, previous exams and other useful resources, including the lecture videos from Fall
2020. All homeworks will be submitted via Quercus.
COVID-19 Measures
For the Fall 2022 term all course activities will be in-person. As such, you must abide by the University of Toronto's
vaccination and face mask policy in order to attend in-person lectures and tutorial. Links containing relevant
information have been provided below:
•COVID-19 FAQ : https://www.viceprovoststudents.utoronto.ca/covid-19/
•Vaccination Policy : https://www.utoronto.ca/utogether/vaccines
•Face Mask Policy : https://www.utoronto.ca/utogether/masksUofToronto{ECE 345{Fall, 2022 3 Course Information
Face Mask Requirements During Lecture/Tutorials : The University's mandatory mask requirement is cur-
rently suspended. However, the use of a medical mask in high-density indoor spaces when physical distancing is not
possible is strongly encouraged. The University is a mask-friendly environment, and we ask everyone to respect each
other's decisions, comfort levels, and health needs.
Course Requirements and Grading Scheme
The nal grade for this class has three components:
•homeworks: There will be ve homeworks you will do in groups of 2-3 students. You can switch groups between
homeworks but you will receive the group grade each time. More details about proper homework submission
are on Quercus. Deadlines for homeworks are nal! Absolutely no late homework will be accepted. Homeworks
account for 25% of your grade (5% each).
•midterm exam: There will be one midterm of two hours and it is open CLRS book. The midterm accounts
for 35% of the grade.
•nal exam: Open CLRS book, two and half hours and 40% of the grade.
Exam dates and rooms will be announced at a later time. Exam material will be simpler versions of the problems
you will see in the homework. Exam type material will be practiced regularly at tutorials.
Remarking: You have exactly seven (7) working days to submit your work (homework or midterm) for remarking
from the time marks are released. There are NO exceptions to this rule and no late homework will be remarked . To
request a remark, state the problem number(s) submitted for remarking, the reason you believe you were marked
unfairly, and the name and email address of the group member(s) who should be contacted for clarications in an
email, attach a pdf of your homework and any TA feedback received (e.g. annotations on the homework, rubrics on
Quercus, etc.), and send to the ECF course email ( ece.algorithms+345@gmail.com ). If there is a legitimate reason
for a late assignment or exam absence (illness, etc.), please email the ECF course email. Keep in mind that ocial
documentation (doctor letter, etc) is required for an exemption. When a homework or midterm is submitted for
remarking, the entire document may be regraded (not just the sections you believe were marked unfairly) and it is
possible you will receive a lower mark than before if we determine the initial grader was too generous.
Cheating Policy
Cheating is against \fair{play" and will not be tolerated under any circumstances. While the pressures of many
classes, homeworks, work and/or extracurricular activities can be overwhelming, this is never an excuse for copying
solutions from others. The University holds among its highest principles the notion of academic freedom
and integrity. Cheaters will face the University's disciplinary committee as well as receive a failing
grade in this course. If you think that there is an issue that inuences your performance in the class then talk to
the instructor.
How to Get the Most out of this Course
You are urged to read the textbook sections posted in the weekly reading assignments, as it is quite thorough, with
many examples and with good motivating discussions and intuitions. The internet is full of additional scientic and
historical material. Do a lot of practice problems from the book. Read the course webpage regularly and email the
TAs if you have any questions. Attend lectures, tutorials and oce hours. Keep up with the pace of the class. Make
sure you understand the solution to all homework questions, even if someone else in your group completed it.
Copyright and FIPPA
Notice of video recording and sharing (Download permissible; re-use prohibited) Course videos and materials belong
to your instructor, the University, and/or other sources, depending on the specic facts of each situation, and are
protected by copyright. In this course, you are permitted to download session videos and materials for your own
academic use, but you should not copy, share, or use them for any other purpose without the explicit permission of
the instructor.